# RISE WELL | REST WELL
#### Video Demo:  [Final Project: Rise Well | Rest Well](https://youtu.be/KchhriGYZzs)
#### Description:
**Rise Well | Rest Well** is a wellness-focused web application that I created to promote **intentionality and productivity** to users’ morning and evening routines. The ideal users of Rise Well | Rest Well are individuals who would like to **increase their daily productivity, improve their positive mindset,** or simply need assistance **staying focused on their morning and evening routines.** I created this project using **Flask, HTML, JavaScript, and SQL.** I used **CSS and Bootstrap** features to build a calming, minimalist interface to promote focus and balance. It combines motivational features, productivity aids, and opportunities for self-reflection. Motivational features include **affirmations** and **daily gratitude entries**, productivity aids include customized **morning and evening checklists**, and opportunities for self-reflection include **daily mood check-ins** (as well as the option to review past daily check-ins and gratitude entries).

### Application Functionality
Within my **app.py** file, you will find a variety of functions: **register, index, evening, login, logout, addStep, gratitudeEntry, dailyEntry, delete, dailyHistory, gratitudeHistory, resetPassword, resetUsername, and resetLogin.** Some of these functions are present within their own HTML files, but some of them, including logout, addStep, gratitudeEntry, dailyEntry, delete, resetPassword, and resetUsername are functions that are used within other HTML files.

### Layouts
**Layout.html** is a file that lays the building blocks for the format of the Rise Well (morning) HTML files, including index.html, login.html, register.html, gratitudeHistory.html, and resetLogin.html. **Evening_layout.html** is a very similar layout with some different components, which are the building blocks for the format of the Rest Well (evening) HTML files, including evening.html and dailyHistory.html. Initially, I had planned on using Bootstrap’s Dark Mode to switch from morning styles to evening styles, but there turned out to be even more changes I wanted to make on the evening interface, so I decided to use two separate layouts.

### Rise Well (Morning Mode)
**Index.html** serves as the main homepage for the **Rise Well** portion of the app. It displays the core interactive features for the morning: **daily affirmation, morning routine checklist, and gratitude journal.** The daily affirmation section dynamically updates daily with a new motivational message that is pulled from the [Affirmations API](https://www.affirmations.dev). The morning routine checklist allows users to **add, delete, and check off their personalized morning steps**, which save and automatically reset at the start of each day. The daily gratitude space provides a text input area where users can **record what they’re grateful for each day**, creating the beneficial habit of starting each day with gratitude. Also within the gratitude space is a link to the user’s **gratitude history (gratitudeHistory.html)**. On this page, a table is displayed with users’ previous gratitude entries organized by date.

### Rest Well (Evening Mode)
With a quick click of the **“moon” icon button** under the navigation bar, users are redirected to **evening.html**, which serves as the homepage of the evening mode of the application, **Rest Well**. It displays the core interactive features for the evening: **daily affirmation (which remains the same as the morning), evening routine checklist, and the “glimpse of my day” feature**. The evening routine checklist, similar to the morning routine checklist, allows users to **add, delete, and check off the steps** of their personalized evening routine. The user’s evening checklist is reset each day (their steps will remain the same, unless deleted by the user, but they will no longer be checked off the next day).

In the **“glimpse of a day”** section of the evening homepage, there is an area for users to click the **“mood” emoji** that best matches their mood that day (options include sad, angry, meh, calm, and excited/happy). Below the mood selector, there is a text area where users **type one sentence to describe their day as a whole**. After this form is completed, it is hidden for the remainder of the day, but the user’s response is displayed. The mood selection and sentence are then **stored in the Rise Well database**, in order to be accessed again in the future. The **history icon** in the “glimpse of a day” section redirects users to the **dailyHistory.html** page, where a table is displayed with all of their previous mood selections and corresponding sentences, organized by the date they completed it.

### Reflection Features
Rise Well’s **Gratitude History** feature and Rest Well’s **Daily History** feature allow users to **reflect on their previous moods and gratitude thoughts**, which promotes **self-awareness and the awareness of mood patterns**.

### User Actions
Additional actions that are available to users include **updating their username and/or password**. User data is **protected and kept consistent across sessions**, even if they are using a different account on the same browser.

### Database Design
The database, **risewell.db**, is the storage unit for all aspects of the application. It includes **5 tables: users, steps, evening_steps, gratitude, and daily_mood**. The **users** table stores **a unique id** for each user, as well as their **username** and password **hash**. The **steps** table stores the **morning steps** added by each user, each step associated with a **unique id** (autoincremented) and the user’s **user_id**, which is referenced from the users table.  The **evening_steps** table does just the same, but storing each user’s evening routine **steps** by their **unique id** (autoincremented) and **user_id**, which is referenced from the users table. The **gratitude** table collects the responses from the **daily gratitude submissions**, organized by the appropriate **user_id, date, and gratitude entry**. Each entry is assigned a **unique id**, which is autoincremented. Finally, the **daily_mood** table collects form responses from **“a glimpse of my day”**, storing the appropriate **user_id, date, mood selection, and sentence**. Each mood selection/sentence combo from a form submission is assigned a **unique id**, which is autoincremented.

### Helper Functions
The **helpers.py** file includes two functions that are referred to in app.py: **apology and login_required**. The **apology** function is used primarily as a fallback to alert the user of **username/password errors and missing fields** in forms. The form inputs are all labeled as “required,” so it is rare that the user will see the apology. However, it is in place for added security, so that a user cannot alter the HTML code to skip the “required” field. The **login_required** function is an added security measure to ensure that a user can only use the website feature if they have an active session, redirecting the user to the login page if they are not in an active session.

### Styling and Responsiveness
In the style sheet, **styles.css**, you will find a plethora of specifications that give the user interface a streamlined style. The use of **pastels, fade-in features, easy-to-read fonts, buttons that are clearly clickable, separation of different website sections, and rounded edges** provide a **clean, minimalistic feel** that promotes focus and balance. In addition, I incorporated features of **Bootstrap containers and tables**, so that the interface is clean and adjusts appropriately to any screen size, including mobile devices.

### JavaScript Functionality
The **JavaScript file (scripts.js)** specifically handles the following actions: **fetching a new affirmation for each user at the start of a new day** and **toggling between classes** to allow for the steps to appear “checked off” when completed, yet resetting them for the next day. **User-specific keys** were used for the affirmations, steps, and form completion in order to store a user’s information until it is ready to be reset the next day. For example, if a user checks off a couple items from their morning routine, the JavaScript functionality will toggle the class to display a **green, crossed off look**. This will remain true even if a user logs out and back in within the same day. The next day, each user’s steps will be **reset to their original display.** Finally, I improved the user experience using JavaScript by incorporating a feature that **stores the user's scrolling position** when their page is refreshed, so that they are automatically relocated to the same spot rather than refreshing to the top of the page.
